Natural nootropics are a group of supplements intended to boost cognitive functions. They have been compared to snake oil and have been accused of having no real effects. Some natural nootropics do have value and are effective in boosting cognitive functions.
Nootropics are well-known compounds or herbs that enhance cognitive performance. Sulliman states they enhance mental performance including; memory, motivation, concentration, and attention (1).
There are generally two types of nootropics, natural nootropics, and synthetic nootropics. Synthetic nootropics are chemical in nature and often come with a host of undesirable side effects while providing more pronounced benefits. Suliman goes on to explain that natural nootropics are proven to boost brain function while also making the brain healthier. The effects of natural nootropics often are slower to manifest and require chronic administration to get the desired effects. Suliman also adds both substances act as vasodilators, increasing blood flow to the brain. This provides the brain with oxygen and nutrients that it requires to function efficiently while also providing energy. Natural nootropics also reduce inflammation in the brain and stimulate the growth of new neuron cells (1).
There are many natural nootropics available that have been used in a variety of cultures for centuries. Their effects on the brain are well known to practitioners. 
One of these herbs mentioned by Hill is Ginkgo biloba, a tree that originated in China and has been used in Chinese medicine for centuries. Ginkgo biloba has many health benefits including; a powerful antioxidant, fights inflammation, improves circulation, reduces symptoms of psychiatric disorders, improves brain function, reduces anxiety, may treat depression, supports eye health, treats headaches, improves Asthma/COPD symptoms, reduce PMS symptoms, and treats sexual dysfunction. It is most notably known as a strong antioxidant and anti-inflammatory. Ginkgo improves circulation to many parts of the body reducing any impairment due to inflammation (1).
Another ancient nootropic talked about by Suliman is Bacopa monnieri, also known as Brahmi. It is an Ayurvedic supplement taken to treat nervous system disorders, including insomnia, anxiety, and epilepsy. In Ayurveda, it is categorized as a medhya rasayana, a compound that stimulates and enhances the memory and intellect. Besides enhancing cognition and memory functions, Brahmi is also known for its anxiolytic effects and in managing convulsive sicknesses (4).
 An article by Julson examines Lion’s Mane mushroom, a nootropic, that also has great anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects. It stimulates the growth of brain and nerve cells protecting the brain from damage caused by Alzheimer's disease. It relieves symptoms of mild depression and anxiety. This mushroom speeds the recovery of nervous system damage. It is also known to protect against ulcers, reduce heart disease risk, manage diabetes symptoms, and boosts the immune system. There is some evidence that it may help fight cancer.
Panax ginseng, studied in a volume by Kiefer and Pantuso, is popularly referred to as an adaptogen. This means that it increases the resistance to stresses which promotes general vitality, including the physical and mental capacity for work. Many research trials have been performed on its extract. The benefits it provides are; an improvement in psychological functioning, increased physical performance, a boost in the immune system, and reduced symptoms of non-insulin dependent diabetes.
There is not a great amount of clinical research done on the effects of nootropics. There is some though and it has proven that at the proper dosage some nootropics have been scientifically proven to boost cognitive functions.
A study was performed by Nathan et al., in 2002, on the effects of acute administration of Ginkgo biloba in a repeated measure, double-blind, placebo-controlled design in which all participants underwent testing. Measures were taken to exclude outside interference such as the participants were required to all eat the same breakfast on the day of testing. The first day of testing the participants were tested to get a baseline measurement. Afterward, they were given their dosage and required to wait 90 minutes before being tested again. This was to ensure that in the patients not receiving a placebo were at the optimal peak plasma Ginkgo biloba levels. The patients receiving the supplement were administered 120 mg of the active ingredient (46).
The test that the participants were subjected to were designed to test memory in different ways. One test was the Cognitive Drug Research computerized test. It is specifically designed to test enhancement and impairment of the human cognitive performance. This test reliably evaluates the potential behavioral effects of a drug.
Another test was designed for numeric working memory. In this test, subjects were briefly shown a series of numbers then asked to pick them out of a list of random numbers. This tested the “sub-vocal rehearsal of digit sequences and the articular loop sub-system of working memory” (Nathan et al., 46).
The next test focused on spatial working memory. The subjects were shown a picture of a house with certain windows lit up. Following this, a picture of a house with only one window lit up, and the participants were required to confirm if that window had been lit in the original picture. This tested “the ability to temporarily retain spatial information and the visio-spatial sub-loop of working memory” (46).
Next, picture recognition was tested. The subjects viewed pictures on a screen and the were asked to wait 15 minutes. After they were required to pick the images they had seen previously out of a new set of pictures. This exercise tested “the ability to discriminate novel from previously presented pictorial information and episodic secondary non-verbal visual recognition” (46).
Simple reaction time was also tested by flashing the word “yes” on a screen randomly. Participants had to press a button each time the saw the word. This tested alertness, power of concentration, and the primary stage of information processing (46).
The final test was on choice reaction time. “Yes” or “No” was flashed on the screen and subjects were required to press the corresponding button as quickly as possible. This test alertness, stimulus discrimination, and response organization (46).
The data was analyzed from the study and determined at the 120 mg dosage there was no evidence of Ginkgo biloba on cognitive functioning. This is a success however because it was determined that this dosage was ineffective in acute administration. Two other studies (Subhan and Hindemark, 1984) (Kennedy et al.,2000) found an enhancement of working memory and serial storage when the acute dose was increased to 600 mg. This shows that this particular nootropic is dose dependant and in fact has an effect on cognitive functioning. (46)
In another study by Banumathy et al., 2002, the seed of Celastrus paniculatus was tested on rodents for its ability to improve memory. Wistar rats were used in this study. Standardized nutritional and environmental conditions were maintained. They were tested on an elevated plus maze to test the retention of learning and memory. The rats were placed in the maze to get a baseline of “transfer latency” (TL). Another measurement was then given after a 30-day drug treatment of C. paniculatus. The results showed a significant decrease in the TL when compared with the control group. This indicates an enhancement of the cognitive functions of rats (Banumathy et al., 325).
Arguments against nootropics are often wrought with emotionally loaded terms focusing on unknown or perceived dangers. Take for example an article from Men’s Health. “The reality is that some of these things potentially could be lethal, mainly because we don’t know exactly what’s in them, says Dr. Kraus.” (Beyerstein, 2018) Most likely this is twisting information on substances tested on animals that are not approved for human consumption. You would never find these substances on the shelf of your local pharmacy. There are many very safe natural nootropics that have a long history of effectiveness. Using chemical nootropics is where you would run into danger.
The validity of many nootropics has been proven. However, the information needs to be taken with a big grain of salt as there is a lack of data for most nootropics, unscrupulous vendors, and misinformed people to sift through. Doing research on the subject will yield results and possibly provide you with a means to improve your life.
Bibliography:
Suliman, Noor Azuin et al. “Establishing Natural Nootropics: Recent Molecular Enhancement Influenced by Natural Nootropic.” Evidence-based Complementary & Alternative Medicine (eCAM) 2016 (2016): 1–12. EBSCOhost. Web.
Detailed writing on the basics of natural nootropics, including a section that describes in detail many of the more popular nootropics.
Hill, Ansley “12 Benefits of Ginkgo Biloba (Plus Side Effects & Dosage).” Healthline. N.p., n.d. Web. 10 Aug. 2019. <https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/ginkgo-biloba-benefits>.
	A descriptive article on the benefits of Ginko biloba.
Julson, Erica MS, RDN, CLT “9 Health Benefits of Lion’s Mane Mushroom (Plus Side Effects).” Healthline. N.p., n.d. Web. 10 Aug. 2019. <https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/lions-mane-mushroom>.
	A descriptive article describing the nootropic lin’s mane mushroom.
Kiefer, David S., and Traci Pantuso. “Panax Ginseng.” American Family Physician 68.8 (2003): 1539–1542. Print. <https://www.aafp.org/afp/2003/1015/p1539.html>
A descriptive article describing Panax Ginseng.
Nathan, Pradeep J. et al. “The Acute Nootropic Effects of Ginkgo Biloba in Healthy Older Human Subjects: A Preliminary Investigation.” Human Psychopharmacology: Clinical & Experimental 17.1 (2002): 45–49. EBSCOhost. Web.
A highly scientific study on the effectiveness of acute dosages of Ginkgo biloba. It references several studies to outline the effectiveness of other dosages as well.
Subhan Z, Hindmarch I. 1984. The psychopharmacological effects of Ginkgo biloba extract in normal healthy volunteers. J Clin Pharmacol Res IV: 89-93.
	A study on the effects of Ginkgo biloba in a clinical setting.
Kennedy DO, Scholey AB, Wesnes KA. 2000. The dose-dependent cognitive effects of acute administration of Ginkgo biloba to healthy young volunteers. Psychopharmacology 151: 416--423.
	A clinical study on Ginko biloba outlining the dependency on dosage.
Bhanumathy, M. et al. “Nootropic Activity of Celastrus Paniculatus Seed.” Pharmaceutical Biology 48.3 (2010): 324–327. EBSCOhost. Web.
	A clinical study on two nootropics and their effects on rodents.
Beyerstein, Lindsay. “Nootropics: The Skeptic’s Guide to Smart Drugs.” Men’s Health 33.7 (2018): 71–73. Print. <https://www.menshealth.com/health/a22590891/nootropics-guide-to-smart-drugs/>
	A magazine article raising concern on the use of nootropics. @